For many, thinking about the future of our planet is terrifying. According to a global survey reported by the BBC, 56 percent of young people believe that humanity is doomed because of climate change and 45 percent say that their anxiety about the climate affects their daily lives. Here in the US, the story is much the same; three-quarters of Americans believe that climate change will result in the extinction of man, and one in five millennials believe that that extinction will occur within their lifetime.
A college student recently wrote the following in a campus newspaper about her climate anxiety:
I stay up into the early hours of the morning, Googling some variation of "Is there hope for climate change," and "Biden climate change plan good?" (...) I fret over every piece of waste I encounter, wondering whether I should trash it or wash it and hope it qualifies for the recycling bin. What if I wash the aluminum foil I heated leftover lasagna on, does it become recyclable then? The anxiety is crippling.
Many young people clearly are suffering intense climate anxiety. And who can blame them? Because so much of the information they consume on the issue - both from the news media and social media - is apocalyptic in nature, this is an inevitable outcome.
But is the messaging they are receiving even true? Is the anxiety they are feeling justified?
A sober examination of the facts and the science would suggest not.
Here's the truth: Climate change is indeed real and has mostly negative effects; however, climate change is not the end of the world.
So, in an effort to make the facts clear and perhaps provide a more comforting alternative to the dominant narrative among my peers, here are a few of the most common myths about the environment, debunked.
Myth #1: Human Extinction Due To Climate Change Is Imminent
At the source of much anxiety about climate change is the belief that humans are likely to go extinct sometime in the near future due to its effects. But that belief is just not correct.
Even the scientists most concerned about climate change rebuke this assertion. Michael Mann, who is a professor of atmospheric science at Penn State and a superstar of the movement to fight climate change, wrote that "There is no evidence of climate change scenarios that would render human beings extinct."
In Michael Shellenberger's book, Apocalypse Never, he notes that Stanford University atmospheric scientist Ken Caldeira also said that "climate change does not threaten human extinction."
Some of the fear about human extinction undoubtedly started after Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez declared, in 2019, that "The world is going to end in twelve years if we don't address climate change." But, as Shellenberger documents in his book, climate scientists from NASA said that "All the time-limited frames are bulls--t," and a paleoclimate researcher at the University of Wisconsin-Madison said that her statement was a "mischaracterization."
In short, there are virtually no scientists who believe, and there is no science to support, the idea that humans will go extinct from climate change.
Myth #2: The Climate Is Getting Substantially More Dangerous for Humans
Usually stemming from the belief that humans will go extinct from climate change is the perception that it is currently making life substantially more dangerous for humans. But, in fact, humans are actually much more protected from climate-related disasters than we were just 100 years ago.
Bjorn Lomborg, who is a visiting professor at Copenhagen Business School and a visiting fellow at Stanford University's Hoover Institution, has shown - based on data from the International Disaster Database - that the individual risk of a climate-related death (ie. from hurricanes, droughts, extreme temperatures, etc.) has declined by 98.9% since 1920.
It is certainly the case that models project storms and other climate-related events to get more intense going forward. But (aside from the fact models have historically failed to accurately predict future climate developments) that does not necessarily mean the positive trend over the past 100 years will reverse itself.
Yes, there is climate danger. But there is also climate resilience. The reason for the dramatic reduction in climate-related deaths over the past 100 years has been the rapid economic and technological development that has characterized the US during that time. Whether it be more reliable infrastructure, access to cheap energy, or a better ability to forecast severe weather events before they take place, these have all led to rising human safety even in the face of climate change. And this has not only been observed in the US, but in countries around the world.
FEE's Saul Zimet summed it up well when he wrote:
The climate resilience side of the equation, despite being at least as significant as the climate danger side, is often ignored in the models of future climate impact. This is because, while it is difficult to model a changing climate, it is impossible to model the future of human ingenuity, which will be composed of decisions and insights that only the people of the future can possibly know.
Myth #3: Natural Disasters Are Getting Substantially More Frequent And Severe
Every time there is a devastating hurricane, drought, heatwave, or wildfire, one can reliably expect the headlines in media outlets ranging from the New York Times to CNN to imply that these disasters are not only getting more frequent, but also more severe, due to climate change.
Hurricanes
Roger Pielke Jr., professor of Environmental Studies at the University of Colorado, has studied both the frequency and impacts of various natural disasters. When it comes to the number of major hurricanes in the continental United States since 1900, he has not found a dramatic increase, but rather a slight decrease.
Yes, it is an old graph
Here is the most recent update pic.twitter.com/ipzvBbur0k
- Roger Pielke Jr. (@RogerPielkeJr) July 22, 2021 
The Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory - which operates within the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research - writes that "There is no strong evidence of increasing trends in U.S. landfalling hurricanes or major hurricanes, or of Atlantic basin-wide hurricanes or major hurricanes since the late 1800s."
Aside from frequency, there is also the issue of intensity, of which there are two aspects. The first is how intense the storm itself is and the second is how much damage there is as a consequence of the storm. On the first question, the evidence is mixed. On the second question, it is true but misleading to say that the economic costs of natural disasters, including hurricanes, have gotten worse.
When Pielke Jr. looked into economic damages from natural disasters over time as a percentage of GDP, he found that they have actually declined.
The cost of natural disasters has been going down since 1990
The world's leading expert on this is @RogerPielkeJr who testified before the Senate on this 2 days ago@SenatorTester asked the expert from the Union of Concerned Scientists to counter him & of course she couldn't pic.twitter.com/wSPEojeqDX
- Michael Shellenberger (@ShellenbergerMD) July 22, 2021 
Even so, the rising dollar number with respect to damages is often cited as evidence that hurricanes are getting worse. In Congressional Democrats' letter advocating for a new Civilian Climate Corps (CCC), for example, they justified their claim of a "record-breaking cyclone season" by writing the following:
The United States experienced 22 billion-dollar weather and climate disasters in 2020, shattering the previous annual record of 16 events. 2020 was the worst fire season on record, burning over 10.2 million acres and costing over $16 billion in damages and $3 billion in suppression costs. The U.S. experienced a record-breaking 30 named tropical cyclones, 7 of which became billion-dollar disasters-also a new record.
But measuring the severity of hurricanes by how much economic damage they cause is misguided because, as Bjorn Lomborg explains in his book False Alarm, it fails to take into account a phenomenon known as the "expanding bull's-eye effect." He writes:
[S]imilar climate impacts will result in more costly disasters because an increasing number of people with more and more valuable assets are at risk. The expanding bull's-eye effect can be thought of as an archery target, with the rings (showing population density) telling us how many people and possessions are at risk of being hit by an imaginary arrow, or natural disaster.
As the human population increases and development takes up a greater proportion of total land - especially in high-risk areas - more natural disasters will inevitably hit somewhere within the bull's eye, thus causing more economic damage than if there was no development there. Over the past 100 years, such development and population increase have been widespread in the US. As a result, we would expect more people to now take up space within the bull's-eye.
Wildfires
Similarly, when it comes to wildfires, the number of acres burned annually has decreased dramatically over time. In 2014, researchers from Auburn University and the Georgia Institute of Technology found "a significant declining trend" of global burned area since 1900. Based on this study, Lomborg writes "the global amount of area burned has declined by more than 540,000 square miles, from 1.9 million square miles in the early part of last century to 1.4 million square miles today"
He has also, based on publicly available data, compiled his own numbers on the area burned in the US since 1900 as a consequence of wildfires. His data show a similar trend, with burned area reducing dramatically over time.
Fire data 1960-2020 from https://t.co/geuaiXOthq, plus NIFC 2020 estimate from Jan 2 2021
1926-1970 from Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970, L48-52
1900-2000 from Fire history and the global carbon budget, https://t.co/juB4S0Km5C pic.twitter.com/hBZD6SwDUO
- Bjorn Lomborg (@BjornLomborg) January 23, 2021 
Moreover, a 2017 study published in Science found that "global burned area declined by ∼25% over the past 18 years."
Despite these facts, it is also clear that more homes are now subject to the effects of wildfires than ever before. However, the reason for this can also be explained by the expanding bull's-eye effect. In False Alarm, Lomborg notes that in 1940, there were only about 500,000 homes in high-fire-risk zones, but it was almost 7 million by 2010. To put that in perspective, the rate at which housing increased in high-fire-risk zones was more than 3 times higher than it was for the country generally. It should therefore be no surprise that more families' homes are at risk today than they have been in the past.
The Takeaway
Over the next 100 years, we should expect temperatures to continue to rise - just as they have in recent history. Along with that, we should expect some of the negative effects of climate change to continue as well.
However, this does not mean the world is ending; it does not mean you should stay up at night crippled with anxiety over the climate; it does not mean we should panic. Rather, we must understand why humanity has been able to adapt to a changing climate thus far and what steps are necessary to ensure human flourishing for generations to come.
Additional Reading
Apocalypse Never, Michael Shellenberger
False Alarm, Bjorn Lomborg
The Case for Climate Change Realism, Benjamin Zycher, National Affairs
??Wrong Again: 50 Years of Failed Eco-pocalyptic Predictions, Myron Ebell and Steve Milloy, Competitive Enterprise Institute
We Are Successfully Adapting To Climate Change, Roger Pielke Jr. and Nick Gillespie, Reason
Top Global Energy Agency Calls for Phasing Out of All Gas-Powered Cars, Coal-Fired Plants, Saul Zimet, Foundation for Economic Education

July 17--By definition, climate change, rising temperatures and drought reports are not issues easily lumped in with job creation and health-care reform. They're science, not politics or public policy.

Put succinctly, most Americans won't vote this November for the presidential candidate most concerned about the weather.

But two events -- the election and this summer's drought -- have given pollsters ample reason to dive into Americans' views about climate change. Though the results are separated largely along party lines, they're worth noting, nonetheless.

A key finding: 6 in 10 Americans believe global weather patterns are more unstable now than they were three years ago, according to polling published last week by the Washington Post and Stanford University. (Those numbers, the Post reported, have remained somewhat consistent since 2006.) Fifty-five percent of Americans believe "a great deal" can be done to reduce global warming.

From our standpoint, that's a sign of progress since a recent report from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration laid down the law about last year's catastrophic heat wave in Texas. That 2011 heat wave, NOAA scientists now say, was 20 times more likely to have occurred last year than it was during conditions in the 1960s because of the burning of fossil fuels. NOAA also found that 2011's heat wave in Great Britain was 62 times as likely because of climate change.

Climate change isn't merely about unbearably hot weather. It's about weather patterns, winter and summer, that stray from the recorded past. It's about unusually deep extremes in cold and hot temperatures, in summer and winter storms. (A few days of 100-degree weather in the South isn't an indicator of global warming.) Significantly, NOAA data now show that a majority of Americans now see man-made climate change as the concern that it is.

(On a side note, it's impossible not to notice NOAA's other recent announcement -- that this summer's drought is the United States' worst since 1956. In Alabama, 33 counties are suffering from a "drought emergency"; 92 percent of Alabama acreage is abnormally dry or in drought.)

The Post reported, "(Most Americans) also see future warming as something that can be addressed, and majorities want government action across a range of policies to curb energy consumption, with more support for tax breaks and government mandates."

We applaud those who understand government's role in limiting greenhouse gas emissions and other climate change-related areas. This being an election year, we also are not surprised by Post polling that shows Democrats are supportive of government action on climate change and Republicans want government to have a limited role on the matter. Regardless of party, a large percentage of polled Americans say they would not support climate change-related energy polices that include tax increases.

In some ways, these mountains of data can be alternately confusing and eye-opening. But what's evident -- and critical -- is that more Americans are understanding man's long-term future on Earth depends on smart energy decisions today.

Nov. 25--The divide between America's conservatives and progressives is nothing new.

Progressives are generally driven by the idea that "we're all in this together" and we should all do our part to make sure everyone enjoys the benefits of living in such a great and prosperous nation.

On the other hand, conservatives are largely rooted in traditional values of "pull yourself up by your bootstraps" hard work, rugged individualism and self-reliance.

At the national level, the country has teetered and tottered for generations between the two ideals -- confirming the value of both approaches.

But in recent decades, those ideals have been hijacked in some corners of conservatism by a passion to achieve financial success over and above (and, sometimes, at the cost of) most other values.

Take climate change, for instance. Few conservatives are able to cite legitimate science that would support their claims that climate change essentially doesn't exist -- and, if it does, humans aren't the cause and therefore have no role in the solution. At the heart of the argument is worry that taking measures like shifting to wind and solar energy to protect the environment would prove too costly to traditional industries and the high-paying jobs they provide.

Take immigration, for instance. Many conservatives argue that their hard-line stance is rooted in concerns about the illegal drug trade and gangs, but crime statistics don't support that view. Others point to the rule of law and national sovereignty. But if you listen long enough, you'll hear the real argument -- that illegal immigrants steal jobs from Americans, and that illegal immigration is a drain on social-service systems and drives up costs for basic provisions like education.

It keeps coming back to the almighty dollar.

This emerging philosophy among conservatives also explains why a rising stock market and low unemployment are reasons enough for many to excuse and overlook the lack of decency that comes daily from the Oval Office.

The latest example of American finances over American values came last week when President Trump, the leader of the free world, literally put a price tag on the head of another human being.

Washington Post journalist Jamal Khashoggi was murdered inside the Saudi Consulate in Istanbul, and a U.S. Central Intelligence Agency investigation has discovered that Saudi crown prince Mohammed bin Salman likely ordered the execution that led to Khashoggi being dismembered and his body parts dissolved in acid.

Trump's response concerning Salman's likely involvement: "Maybe he did, maybe he didn't."

Trump called into question his own intelligence agency, but what's worse is the reason he gave for doing it. Here's the explanation in his own words:

"After my heavily negotiated trip to Saudi Arabia last year, the Kingdom agreed to spend and invest $450 billion in the United States. This is a record amount of money. ... If we foolishly cancel these contracts, Russia and China would be the enormous beneficiaries ..."

What he literally said was that Khashoggi's life was not worth $450 billion. And what he essentially said was, neither are our American values.

Trump also pointed to the price of oil as reason to stay in good graces with the Saudis. "If you want to see oil prices go to $150 a barrel, all you have to do is break up our relationship with Saudi Arabia."

Certainly, all conservatives don't reason this way. For many, their conservative values are more about religious freedom, low taxes and biblical principles that oppose gay marriage and abortion. That's especially the case here in the South.

But too many conservatives excuse this heartless "America first" posture that prioritizes dollar signs above long-held American values of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.

Instead of saying, "but look at the economy," traditional conservatives used to agree that some things don't have a price tag.

It begs the question asked long ago by a hero to many conservatives: "What does it profit a man to gain the world and lose his soul?"

Oct. 28--TUPELO -- Even as a recent report says some of the most negative impacts from climate change could begin earlier than previously thought, climate policy is virtually invisible in Mississippi's midterm elections.

Earlier this month, the Intergovermental Panel on Climate Change, a panel of scientists convened by the United Nations, released a report examining the outcomes associated with different warming scenarios.

An increase in average global temperatures of 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit above pre-industrial era temperatures was once considered the threshold at which major adverse climate impacts would be felt.

However, the latest IPCC report determined that 2.7 degrees Fahrenheit of warming above pre-industrial levels could trigger disastrous results, including widespread droughts, wildfires and a collapse of coral reefs.

To hold the rise of global temperatures at or below 2.7 degrees Fahrenheit, energy uses would have to shift dramatically, and techniques to pull carbon out of the atmosphere will also have to be more widely deployed, according to scientists.

With two races for the U.S. Senate simultaneously ongoing in Mississippi, none of the candidates devote any space on their websites to the issue, though a few discuss a need to protect natural resources like air and water from pollution.

Republicans Roger Wicker, Cindy Hyde-Smith and Chris McDaniel have all variously praised either President Donald Trump's decision to withdraw from the Paris Agreement or his decision to roll back various environmental regulations.

Sen. Roger Wicker is among the most skeptical members of the U.S. Senate toward the consensus of climate scientists.

In 2015, the Senate approved a resolution affirming that "climate change is real and not a hoax" on a 98-1 vote, with Wicker alone refusing to sign onto this resolution.

The resolution did not offer a view as to whether human activity has contributed to climate change.

Wicker has also rejected the policy recommendations of the recent IPCC report.

"The policy recommendations of the IPCC report are completely impractical. We can protect our environment without destroying our economy," Wicker told the Daily Journal in a statement.

Hyde-Smith has been in office only a few months and doesn't have a lengthy paper trail on the issue.

When asked about the senator's views on climate change, Hyde-Smith spokesman Chris Gallegos released the following statement to the Daily Journal: "Senator Hyde-Smith supports President Trump's policies that keep the United States from being locked into international policies that put us at an unfair disadvantage economically or security-wise.

"Senator Hyde-Smith also believes in the ingenuity of this country to develop new technologies to ensure access to affordable energy and address these issues."

Gallegos did not offer responses, however, to questions posed by the Daily Journal in an effort to locate Hyde-Smith more specifically along the spectrum of opinion about climate science.

The Daily Journal asked for example, if Hyde-Smith believes average temperatures are increasing and whether Hyde-Smith believes human activity has contributed to warming.

On the Democrat side, Mike Espy's campaign did not respond to questions seeking a statement about the candidate's views on climate change issues.

David Baria is the only candidate thus far to clearly espouse a belief that climate change is real, a threat and caused to some extent by human activity.

"I am very concerned about it," said Baria, who resides in Bay St. Louis. "If you live along the coast, you have to be concerned."

However, Baria said he doesn't see many voters motivated by this issue.

"I certainly think most Mississippians are more concerned about healthcare and funding for public education than climate change at the moment because those are issues that they deal with every day," Baria said. "Climate change falls down the list, in terms of concerns that are front burner."

The Environmental Protection Agency at one time maintained a website with information on climate change. Much of this information was removed by President Donald Trump's administration but the information is still variously archived online.

This website included a forecast of likely climate change impacts for every state.

The factsheet for Mississippi claims that far from a future phenomenon, Mississippi is experiencing negative climate changes now.

"Mississippi experienced record-breaking heat, increased drought and flooding, and rapid sea level rise in recent years," the factsheet states. "As global temperatures continue to rise, Mississippi is expected to experience more heat waves, droughts and floods, continued sea level rise and intensified hurricanes."

On January 10, 1901, Spindle top gushed forth near Beaumont, ushering in the age of oil. An unholy amount of money blanketed Texas, materializing in pocketbooks as if manifested by God. Then, 119 years and four days later, Todd Staples, the president of the Texas Oil and Gas Association, a trade organization for several thousand firms associated with the state's fossil fuel industries, got on the phone to take questions from the media about the group's periodic efforts to keep that money flowing-specifically, its plans for the 2020 election. Things took an unexpected turn.

A reporter pointed out that the midterms, in 2018, saw a surge in young voters, who are much more likely than older folks to say they want the government to take action on climate change. Did that concern TXOGAP Staples responded that the organization considered itself an ally of those voters. "The oil and natural gas industry is absolutely committed to climate progress," he said, "and we want to help get the message out that no one is investing more in low-carbon technology. Every voter needs to know we share a common goal of a lower-emissions future."

It was a pretty milquetoast statement but a remarkable one coming from Staples. A staunch Republican and former Texas agriculture commissioner, Staples spent his time in office attacking proposals to address climate change and once urged the U.S. Department of Agriculture to fire all its "treasonous" employees involved in promoting "Meatless Monday," an international climate-conscious campaign to eat vegetarian once a week. In 2010 Staples joined Governor Rick Perry and Attorney General Greg Abbott to promote the state's lawsuits against the Obama-era Environmental Protection Agency as it attempted to curb the nation's carbon emissions, and all three sowed confusion about climate science in the process.

The idea that limiting greenhouse gases would be good, which Staples was endorsing, implies that emissions are in some way bad or have negative consequences, a concession with sweeping implications for TXOGA members, not to mention the broader Texas economy. If emitting carbon at current levels is harmful, then it follows, even from a conservative perspective, that the state ought to curb carbon, at least when practical. Was the mouthpiece of Texas Oil calling, indirectly, for a crackdown on the flaring of natural gas or for limits on methane emissions from leaky pipelines? For an end to the massive state and federal subsidies for fossil fuels? Or even for electric cars, solar farms, and nuclear power? Was Staples playing the role of Mikhail Gorbachev, and was this his glasnost (or, ahem, his gasnost)?

Staples took another question: Did TXOGA agree that burning oil and gas contributed to climate change? "We believe that all emissions contribute to climate change, and we believe that our industry is committed to doing our part," Staples said. "Every emission, wood that's burned, there's carbon emissions from multiple sources, and to have a real conversation, we need to look at all sources."

The suggestion that a family in, say, Burundi, with a wood-burning stove is a coequal culprit in the warming of the planet is an indication that Staples was not exactly channeling Greta Thunberg. But the timing was itself telling. He spoke as unprecedented wildfires ravaged vast swaths of Australia, a leading exporter of coal, putting pressure on Australia's conservative prime minister to acknowledge the country's significant carbon output, even as he said he would protect the coal industry. In the United States, there are other signs of a thawing of hard-line messaging on climate change, even during the rule of an administration steadfastly opposed to doing anything about the problem. The American Petroleum Institute, the national counterpart to TXOGA, recently started referring more to the "natural gas and oil" industry, instead of "oil and gas," emphasizing the more climate-friendly fuel, at least if produced and transported appropriately.

About a week after Staples's concession, at an event hosted by the conservative Texas Public Policy Foundation, Texas congressman Dan Crenshaw, a 36-year-old former Navy SEAL who has positioned himself as the face of millennial conservatism, introduced a small disturbance in the force by telling the audience that Republicans needed to start taking environmental issues, including climate change, seriously. Crenshaw noted that the environment regularly ranked as a top concern for Democrats, Republicans, and independents alike. "We can make fun of the left's sort of alarmist views on climate change, and we should, to an extent, but we can't ignore it completely," he said, because they were "not totally untrue." Crenshaw said the GOP should emphasize that climate change could be solved by "innovation, research, and development," which is more politically palatable to voters than asking them to give up steaks and pickup trucks.

Not a particularly radical sentiment: Crenshaw's suggestion is still to the "right" of virtually every major conservative party in the developed world. But again, you have to take into account the speaker and his audience. The Texas Public Policy Foundation has ties to fossil fuel interests, and in recent years it has spent generously on a campaign to hobble the thriving Texas wind-power industry while protecting the vast government subsidies that still flow to the oil, gas, and coal industries.

Around the same time that Crenshaw made his comments, Houston's elite businesspeople gathered for the annual meeting of the Greater Houston Partnership, the powerful business association at the heart of the oil-driven city. In almost any other context, Chair Bobby Tudor's message to the audience of oil and gas types would have been seen as an invocation of conventional wisdom, but here it was brave, or at least bold: "A consensus has emerged among scientists, business leaders, and the general public that climate change is a real problem that requires urgent attention from all of us, and that we therefore will be using less hydrocarbon-based energy sources."

The industry was "dramatically out of favor at the moment, in most every corner of the investing and political world," he said, and it needed urgently to adapt. "At its most basic level, I think we can all agree that having less CO2 emissions in the atmosphere would be a good thing-and as Houston's business leaders, we need to be committed to working to make that happen."

For skeptics inclined to think the change in rhetoric was just a PR move, Staples for one was ready to oblige. Two days after his call with reporters, he went on the public radio show the Texas Standard to clean up his spill. It seemed as if he had intended to signal a change in messaging but was surprised by how seriously everyone had taken it. "I think the term 'climate change' has been hijacked. I think it's been used to unfortunately introduce climate hysteria or climate confusion. I think the term is used in such a way to confuse the public that the sky is falling in," he said.

Much of the industry reacted to Staples's message-and his subsequent walkback-with a shrug. But some were angry. "Unfortunately, many of these large companies feel the need to apologize rather than stepping up and talking about the dramatic impact cheap, reliable energy has made on our standard of living," said Kathy Shannon, the executive director of the Permian Basin Petroleum Museum, in Midland. The right-wing advocacy organization Texas Scorecard accused Staples of "jumping on the liberal bandwagon." One conservative blogger wrote that "one can only assume that Staples is now a non-climate-denier in order to reach future political heights," perhaps mollifying the left in advance of a new political run. "He's prepping as a Beto clone."

Of course, there's something a little ridiculous about parsing statements from oil and gas trade groups at a time when Australia and the Amazon are burning. There's a kind of recurrent amnesia that paints climate change as a perennially "new" problem, an issue that is just reaching critical mass of awareness.

It's shocking today to reflect on just how much we've known all along and how much we've decided to ignore. Since at least the early 1800s, scientists have been aware of the greenhouse gas effect. In 1856 scientist Eunice Foote established that carbon dioxide was remarkably efficient at trapping infrared heat, like that from the sun, and theorized that a carbon-saturated atmosphere would spike the earth's temperature. By the 1890s, in the years before Spindletop, researchers had moved on to the question of how fast carbon emissions would heat the earth.

And it's not as if this scientific knowledge was a secret either. In the 1950s, a short educational film directed by Frank Capra in a cheery midcentury style and screened at schools across the country showed a scientist predicting that thanks to the "waste products of civilization," future tourists would possibly one day board "glass-bottom boats" to get a glimpse of "the drowned towers of Miami." Political leaders were also aware of the problem. In the 1980s, politicians as conservative as George H.W. Bush and Margaret Thatcher warned of the urgent threat posed by climate change. As recently as 2008, the presidential candidates of both parties had sweeping plans to rein in carbon emissions. These periods of awareness come and go.

When pressure builds, the industries with the biggest carbon footprints adopt new messaging, and then the pressure dissipates, and life, and heating, goes on. While Staples's announcement is significant, it also fits neatly into that unfortunate pattern. Which is especially galling, because the industry he represents has known what's going on for years. Thanks to dogged reporting by Inside Climate News and the Los Angeles Times, we know that as early as 1977, Texas oil giant Exxon, a prominent member of TXOGA, was not only producing its own scientific climate models that calculated future warming trends but also using that knowledge to plan its long-term investments. The next year, Exxon's chief scientist warned internally that "present thinking holds that man has a time window of five to ten years before the need for hard decisions regarding changes in energy strategies might become critical." Yet for decades more, the company funded campaigns to muddy the waters and forestall political action-decisions that have not only spawned a wave of lawsuits against Exxon but also transformed the very physical and chemical composition of the atmosphere.

In light of this history, it might seem as if nothing will ever change-at least not in time to stave off the grimmest future scenarios predicted by scientists. But that's too pessimistic a view. There are reasons for hope, and one of them comes from a most unexpected source: young Republicans.

Benji Backer is a clean-cut, wholesome-looking Wisconsin conservative who cut his teeth arguing with teachers in high school about Republican governor Scott Walker's fight with public unions. But now, at the age of 22, he's the president and founder of the American Conservation Coalition, which is trying to sell the Republican party on environmental issues. The group draws inspiration from the legacy of Teddy Roosevelt and Richard Nixon, who championed national parks and oversaw the creation of the EPA, respectively.

Backer knows something that both Staples and Crenshaw alluded to in their remarks: on climate change, young Republicans are closer to Democrats in many ways than older Republicans. A pivotal moment in Backer's political awakening came when he attended the Conservative Political Action Conference, at the time an important annual gathering of movement conservatives.

There, he connected with other young conservatives who, he learned, considered traditional social issues, like gay marriage, to be irrelevant. Instead, Backer says, the activists wanted to talk about climate change, "a number one issue throughout their entire lives."

Public opinion surveys bear this out. In October, the Texas Politics Project at the University of Texas revealed a stark generational gap among Republicans on the issue of climate. Only 33 percent of Texas Republicans over forty said they thought climate change was happening, compared to a whopping 70 percent of those under forty. Of those young Republicans who believe it is happening, 61 percent said they're "very" or "somewhat" worried. Those under-forty Republicans are even more likely to be "very worried" about climate change than independents of all ages.

Such surveys may actually undersell generational differences. As one conservative pointed out to me, young Republicans over the age of thirty or so grew up during the culture wars of the 2000s and developed a distaste for environmentalists, exemplified by Al Gore and the South Park character "ManBearPig"-a cartoon reflection of the popular view that people who talked about climate change were smug, hypocritical weirdos. Young Republicans like Backer don't see things that way. Even within young Republican groups, Backer says, the gap between younger and older members can be cavernous.

The American Conservation Coalition, it should be said, is not influential, at least not yet. Other conservatives have mocked the group, and only a few elected officials have endorsed its mission, mostly Republicans from the Northeast and the Pacific Northwest. But Backer and his peers stress to other Republicans that climate policy can be a bridge to a younger generation that generally views the party with disdain. And they warn their elders that they'll be forced to align with Democrats if the GOP refuses to move on an issue some young Republicans feel is existential. "Republicans will keep losing the youth vote if they don't rethink this," Backer says.

Backer's group isn't alone. Students for Carbon Dividends is a confederation of College Republican clubs that supports the idea of imposing a price on carbon and returning the proceeds to Americans in the form of a tax rebate. Its founding coalition included College Republican and Young Conservative chapters at Texas Christian University, Trinity University in San Antonio, and the University of Houston.

Though the news media focuses on left-wing climate activists, these conservatives might have more of an influence on the climate debate, polarized as it is. But as they know, they're running out of time to make a mark.

A new poll says most Louisiana voters want their elected leaders to tackle the issue of how to maintain the state's coastal areas. The pol,l conducted by BDPC + Pinsonat on behalf of Restore the Mississippi River Delta, says 98 percent of voters say officials should work to maintain as much of Louisiana's coast as possible.

The poll says 97 percent want the issue to be a priority while in office. Ninety-two percent of voters agree with the state balancing restoration of coastal wetlands with protection efforts such as levees. Eighty-two percent support sediment diversions which would deliver sediment from the Mississippi River to build and sustain wetlands. Such projects include the Mid-Barataria and Mid-Breton Sediment Diversions that would maintain tens of thousands of acres in Plaquemines Parish. A news release said Louisiana has lost nearly 2,000 square miles of coastal land since the 1930s and could lose 4,000 more in the next 50 years. Ninety-seven percent of poll respondents said elected officials need to protect existing funds dedicated to coast restoration and protection, while 96 percent want to find new sources of funding. Sixty-three percent said they would support a state tax if they knew the funds would go directly to the efforts. The poll also found that 71 percent of voters believe in climate change, with half indicating that climate change is affecting them today and 72 percent saying it will impact future generations. Pollsters used telephone interviews with 1,006 respondents from July 23 through July 29, the news release said.

The trillion-dollar question of who should pay for global warming is coming to a head in talks on an international climate pact, as developing countries worry they won't get enough money to tackle the problem.

With just five weeks left before a U.N. climate summit in Paris, developing countries closed ranks at weeklong talks ending Friday in Bonn and called on wealthy nations to make firm financial commitments to help them fight and adapt to climate change.

The Paris summit "will be judged by what is contained in the core agreement on finance. For us, that will be the yardstick for success," said Nozipho Mxakato-Diseko of South Africa, who chairs a developing country bloc of 134 countries.

In testy exchanges with the Algerian and U.S. diplomats leading the climate talks, Mxakato-Diseko complained that a draft deal they produced was "lopsided" in favor of developed countries. She even drew an analogy to apartheid.

Western delegates said they were disappointed by the characterization of the talks as a rich-poor struggle over responsibilities to address climate change.

"We strongly oppose that division," Netherlands climate envoy Michel Rentenaar told The Associated Press. "If there is a division, it's perhaps between those who want an ambitious accord and those who don't. "

The slow pace in Bonn contrasted with the momentum outside the U.N. talks. Leaders of the Group of Seven wealthy economies this year endorsed "deep cuts" in climate-warming greenhouse gases, top polluters China and the U.S. deepened their cooperation on climate issues and Pope Francis called fighting climate change a moral imperative.

Yet delegates said it wasn't surprising that negotiations on the Paris agreement would get stuck on money — always a stumbling block in the U.N. talks — and that it probably would be one of the last issues to get untangled.

The Paris deal is likely to have some provisions on financing projects to fight global warming for poor countries. The question is how specific they will be.

"Some people just want to plant a few seeds and some want the rosebush in full bloom," said Alden Meyer, an observer of the talks from the Union of Concerned Scientists.

Developed countries have agreed to boost the flow of climate finance to $100 billion annually by 2020, but are reluctant to make firm commitments beyond that, partly because of budget uncertainties. They also want to expand the pool of donors to include China and other emerging economies.

European Union negotiator Sarah Blau said that was already happening outside the negotiations, pointing to a recent U.S.-China announcement where Beijing pledged $3.1 billion in climate finance to poor countries. The U.N. talks, she said, are "somehow detached from what's happening really on the ground. "

The money is used in two ways. First, to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by helping developing countries switch from high-polluting fossil fuels to wind, solar and other renewable sources of energy. Second, to help the most vulnerable countries including small island nations adapt to climate change by building barriers against rising seas or developing drought-resilient crops.

Climate finance is hard to measure because there are no common standards on what to count. A recent report by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development estimated climate finance flows reached $62 billion in 2014, which developed countries took as a sign they were well on track toward the $100 billion.

Mxakato-Diseko dismissed those figures as unreliable "because we don't know what methodology was used, the veracity thereof, the credibility thereof. "

Coalescing around the finance issue, developing countries appeared more united in Bonn than at previous talks this year and collectively rejected a 20-page draft agreement they said didn't address their concerns.

Amendments were made to the text, adding many competing options on how to deal with finance and other crunch issues, but few compromises were made. By Friday, it swelled to 55 pages and negotiators started thinking about scheduling another round of talks before Paris.

"We've been running a marathon for years to reach to this point. Now we need an all-out sprint to get over the finish line in Paris," said Jennifer Morgan of the World Resources Institute, a Washington-based environmental think tank.

A deal in the French capital would be the first asking all countries to take action to reduce emissions. The previous agreement, the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, only required emissions targets from developing countries.

This time more than 150 countries have announced emissions targets for after 2020, when the Paris deal would take effect.

However, all commitments are voluntary so far. European attempts to make them compulsory in the agreement face stiff resistance from the Obama administration, which needs to submit any internationally binding targets to a skeptical Senate for approval.

Oct. 9—Failing to react and adapt to threats posed by climate change and extreme weather could seriously interrupt operations at the Department of Energy's many installations and could lead to "a significant loss of time and research," the agency warned in a plan recently made public by the White House.

Both the Energy Department's national defense and environmental cleanup portfolios are endangered by climate-change inaction, the 2021 Climate Adaptation and Resilience Plan suggests. So, it emphasizes, a proactive problem-solving approach is necessary.

"Even as we are full speed ahead in our efforts to slow climate change," Secretary of Energy Jennifer Granholm said in a statement Thursday, "its devastating effects are undoubtedly impacting our strategic mission."

Nuclear security work — on the atomic arsenal, for example — is "largely conducted at DOE sites that are vulnerable to extreme weather conditions and climate events," the report reads, and remediation efforts could be disrupted if facilities dedicated to processing radioactive wastes "are impacted by climate hazards or if groundwater remediation systems are impacted by droughts."

The department's specialized facilities require "significant water and energy resources," the 26-page road map continues, meaning shortages or natural disasters could dishevel its "particle accelerators, bio-refinery pilot plants, supercomputers, and waste processing facilities." The Energy Communities Alliance on Friday pointed out that climate change has long afflicted the sensitive sites under DOE watch: "Wildfires have caused millions of dollars of damages, power outages, and temporary shutdowns of sites at Los Alamos and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory," the coalition of governments noted in an update. "Extreme cold has damaged critical facilities at the National Nuclear Security Administration's Pantex plant in Texas."

But, the Energy Department noted in its package, a proven process to identify and respond to hazards is on the books; stringent rules, prerequisites and redundancies already guide construction of nuclear labs, plants and sites.

So far, 51% of Energy Department complexes have been screened for climate risks and their potential impacts. Facilities and operations critical to the DOE mission and national security, generally, will be prioritized moving forward.

"Sustaining DOE's mission in this changing environment is dependent on DOE's ability to successfully identify aspects of climate change likely to impact our mission and operations," the report states, "as well as our ability to respond strategically."

At the Savannah River Site, specifically, the Office of Environmental Management is shoring up defenses against scorching temperatures and raging storms spurred by a warming planet, and is working to modernize the electrical grid. At the Hanford Site in Washington, wildfire-tolerant vegetation has been planted and ice vests are used to combat heat stress among workers.

The DOE blueprint was one of more than 20 published this week, the result of an executive order from President Joe Biden. Officials have for months worked on the plans, which show how key government agencies will navigate the climate crisis and its short- and long-term consequences.

"DOE's operations must adapt to this changing environment to mirror the bold agenda that President Biden has set for America," Granholm said. "This first-of-its-kind plan shows our commitment to being a changemaker and tackling this existential threat."

The White House on Thursday said the array of plans reflect Biden's "whole-of-government approach to confronting the climate crisis." Taking holistic action now, the administration said, will minimize damage down the road.

Jan. 16--Maybe I've totally missed it but I can't recall a single time recently, while most of our nation has been in a crippling deep freeze, Europe has been experiencing it's lowest temperatures in years and China has been blanketed with heavy snowfalls, when I've heard anyone mention the threat of global warming.

We certainly didn't blame global warming last week for providing us with temperatures in the teens, which was actually nothing compared to the folks in the upper Midwest who experienced an almost unfathomable --30 degrees, and that's with no wind chill factor.

Actually, a little global warming might have felt pretty good to these people, who were basically just trying to survive.

I may be going out on a limb here but I've got to believe this global warming thing, notwithstanding whatever Al Gore and a few other so-called experts think, just might turn out to be as much of a bust as the Y2K scare that had everyone terrorized for months before the calendar rolled over to the year 2000.

What people don't seem to grasp is that the earth has been in existence for four and a half billion years and over that time its climate has changed, hot to cold and cold to hot, millions of times and will continue to do so as long as it's still spinning, whether man remains here or not, and there's probably not a lot anyone can do about it.

I'm no scientist and certainly no expert in this field but that's just the way I feel.

By the way, just thought you'd like to know Christmas is only 343 days away. It's time to start looking for those special sales at stores real soon.

Don't laugh, the Christmas push will occur sooner than you might think, or just in time for store owners to begin complaining, again, about sales not being as good as last year.

Try these events

If you're looking for something to do over the next few days here are a few suggestions.

--Martin Luther King Jr. photographs by Burk Uzzle on display at the Wilson Arts Council. I don't think the people of Wilson are aware of the importance of this impressive collection. Displays like this one normally debut at fancy art galleries in places like New York or Paris.

--Wilson Hot Stove/N.C. Baseball Museum Annual Banquet on Jan. 25 at the Wilson Shrine Club at 6:00 p.m. No matter what age, if you're a baseball fan or participant you're almost guaranteed to enjoy this annual event.

Whopsided or caddywhompus?

Can anyone clearly explain the differences and similarities between whopsided and caddywhompus?

Be honest, now, without looking it up could you really spell, hors d'oeuvres, pronounced Or-Durves?

If the spelling weren't troubling enough its pronunciation is just as disturbing with pronunciations out there like Or Durbs, Horses Doovers and others.

This word, or words, causes so many problems maybe it should just be eliminated and simply called snacks.

Cat leash law amusing

Of all the news stories circulating recently one of the most amusing has got to be the cat leash law that was proposed by the town of Clayton.

I don't ever remember seeing anyone walking a cat on a leash except once, and that was an ugly scene as the cat looked as if it was being strangled while being dragged along a sidewalk.

True, a leash works fine for dogs. But cats are a different story altogether.

Anyone who knows anything about cats knows a cat is going to do exactly what a cat wants to do when a cat wants to do it, and being led around with a collar around it's neck is not normally what it wants to do.

Apparently cooler heads prevailed and the proposed ordinance was rescinded by the council. But I sort of wish they would have passed it because it might have been interesting to follow this one.

A climate change meeting in Atlanta on Thursday had all the ingredients of a political spectacle.

With Donald Trump, a noted skeptic of climate change science winning the White House, a nervous federal agency scrapped plans to host the event. Enter Al Gore. The former vice president helped revive the conference and took to the podium Thursday to talk about his signature issue.

But it was science -- not politics -- that carried the day.

In the climate and health meeting held at The Carter Center, Gore, a former Democratic presidential candidate, steered clear of mentioning Trump. Instead, he stressed that climate changes could render parts of the Middle East -- including some of the holiest cities on the planet -- uninhabitable. It could also cause deadly health problems and reduce life expectancy. Those in poverty will be hardest hit, he said.

The event was supposed to be a three-day conference held at the Centers for Disease Control. But when that event was cancelled following the presidential election, Gore helped organize a condensed, one-day meeting instead.

Gore urged scientists and health care providers to unite in efforts to combat the effects of climate change.

Among the most serious problems presented to conference attendees was the belief that the rising heat index could make parts of the world uninhabitable, Gore said.

"This is a relatively new finding, that in some areas of the Middle East and north Africa, there will be, according to the scientific predictions, areas that will no longer be fit for human habitation -- beyond the limits for human survival," Gore said. "The holy cities of Mecca and Medina are in this zone. Two years in Iran, the heat index -- the combination of temperature and humidity -- reached 165 degrees Fahrenheit.

"No human being can live for more than a few hours outdoors in those conditions," Gore said.

Despite the gloomy outlook, Gore said there are ways to deal with the effects of climate change, but those will take collaboration both in the U.S. and abroad.

"We do have the solutions at hand,"Gore said. "Hope is justified.We are going to win this. We have solutions that are now readily available."

Experts from Columbia University, Harvard University, the University of Wisconsin the World Health Organization and the CDC were among the speakers and panelists at the fast-paced conference.

"We're doing three days in one day," Gore joked at the microphone during sessions.

Atlanta resident Cindy Powell, who has worked in critical care, attended the conference because she's returning to school and is interested in public health. She was saddened the initial conference was cancelled, but said Thursday's meeting was a resilient effort.

"It's better than nothing. It's a start," Powell said. "The positive forces of the world intend to move forward regardless."

Leslie Bass, a commercial photography student, didn't know exactly what she'd be attending as part of an internship. But she was shocked at the staggering numbers of health issues and deaths related to climate changes.

"This is way bigger than politics, but politics in our country are going to hinder progress," Bass said. "It's not some myth. These are not alternative facts."

