This has been a year marked by terrifying news about climate change: extreme weather, massive wildfires, persistent drought in some areas and catastrophic flooding in others. The sense of impending doom was made official when the United Nations' Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change warned that the world is almost certain to blow past the target set by the 2015 Paris Agreement of holding the increase in global temperature to 1.5 degrees Celsius above the 19th century level. That was "a code red for humanity," U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres warned. "Global heating is affecting every region on Earth, with many of the changes becoming irreversible." And yet, as improbable as it seems, there are glimmers of hope on the horizon. Public opinion has moved, partly because more people now have firsthand experience with the effects of climate change. A poll sponsored by Yale and George Mason universities reported this month that a record 76% of Americans think global warming is real; only 12% think it isn't. "Denialism," the dismissal of climate change as bogus, is dying. An increasing number of Americans want their political leaders to do something about climate change. A Pew Research Center poll in May found that almost two-thirds say it should be treated as a top priority. That's tempered by the fact that Americans rank plenty of other issues -- beginning with the economy and COVID-19 -- as "top priorities." But among Democrats and young voters especially, climate has become a core issue. They want their government to act. Political leaders follow the poll numbers. In Europe, climate is a serious priority for almost all major parties. In the United States, the issue is polarizing; many Republicans are still skeptical. But for Democrats like President Biden and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, acting against climate change has become a must-do. Next month, many of those politicians, including Biden, will head to the Scottish city of Glasgow for a summit meeting. The purpose is to win new commitments for action -- especially from China, the industrial behemoth that burns more coal than the rest of the world combined. The good news there is that China, which has long proclaimed its intention to clean up its energy sector someday, is increasingly a global outlier. The International Energy Agency, which once championed fossil fuel industries, now says demand for oil, gas and coal could peak within a decade -- thanks mostly to the rise of solar, wind and other low-carbon technologies. "There is increasing optimism in the climate and energy communities that [carbon dioxide] emissions have plateaued or are now plateauing," Dagomar Degroot, an environmental historian at Georgetown University, told me last week. "Scenarios that forecast soaring emissions now seem implausible." That doesn't mean the problem is solving itself, he warned. "Warming will continue until we release fewer emissions than can be absorbed. ... That threshold still seems to be decades away. We need to work harder to bring it closer." But while there's not much optimism in the short term, the long-run goal of slowing and then reversing global warming no longer looks unreachable. The problem can be solved with tools we have: evolving technologies, efficiency and conservation. The environmental movement's problem now, perversely, isn't denialism; it's "doomism," the view that the planet's collapse is inevitable, and efforts to prevent catastrophe are futile. "Fear-based messaging" was once useful because it grabbed people's attention, but now it risks getting in the way, Katharine Hayhoe, chief scientist of the Nature Conservancy, told me. Her new book, "Saving Us," makes a case for hope. Doomism "isn't helpful when it leads to inaction," she said. "We're not just tied to the railway track, where there's nothing we can do. We're in the locomotive with our hand on the throttle. We have the ability to take our hand off the throttle and put our foot on the brake. "We can't avoid all the impacts, because some of them are here today. But we absolutely can avoid the worst impacts," Hayhoe added. The next three decades will still be hard. The IPCC report described five possible scenarios for the rest of this century; even the most optimistic forecasts that temperatures will continue to rise through at least 2050. The five "best estimates" for the year 2100 were temperature increases ranging from 1.4 to 4.4 degrees Celsius. The question for the politicians who are about to gather in Glasgow is: How much will they do to reduce those numbers? Which scenario do they want to bequeath to their successors -- and to their grandchildren? But it's just possible that this decade could be remembered as one in which humans solved a collective problem and began to tame climate change. That, at least, provides grounds for hope. Climate change is such a massive problem, with such potentially catastrophic ramifications, many people have trouble getting their heads around the danger we face. So let's put things in simpler terms. Climate change means you'll be paying more for coffee, every day, for possibly the rest of your life. And it may not taste as good. "U.S. consumers should expect much more expensive and lower-quality coffee because of rising temperatures, extreme rainfalls, and higher frequency of severe droughts," said Titus O. Awokuse, chairman of the department of agricultural, food and resource economics at Michigan State University. "Recent studies show that up to 60% of high-quality coffee species are at risk of extinction because of the negative impacts of climate change," he told me. There. Got your attention now? Climate change isn't just an environmental issue. It's a consumer issue. The cost of food is rising. That's partly due to supply and labor issues related to the COVID-19 pandemic. But it's also a reflection of how our planet's changing climate is affecting crops, livestock and other food sources. "Prices reflect supply and demand, and if production costs rise or supply becomes more constrained, prices will rise," said Carolyn Dimitri, an associate professor of nutrition and food studies at New York University. "Climate change is likely to increase production costs and reduce supply, at least in some years," she predicted, adding that she would be "horrified" if decent coffee became harder to come by. "I will pay just about any price for my coffee," Dimitri said, echoing my own thoughts and, I suspect, those of millions of other coffee drinkers. Coffee futures recently jumped to the , due in part to extreme weather in Brazil, the world's largest coffee producer. Factor in pandemic-related supply issues, and the cost of coffee beans has risen more than 40% so far this year. Because caffeine heavyweights such as Starbucks and Nestle buy their coffee supplies well in advance, not all dealers of our daily fix will be raising prices immediately. But some are already warning of higher retail costs. J.M. Smucker, maker of Folgers and Dunkin' ground coffee, said it has no choice but to jack up prices. "We are seeing inflationary costs impacting the entire fiscal year," the company's chief financial officer said during a recent conference call. Coffee is just one item on supermarket shelves that's getting more expensive because of climate change. Harsh weather is driving up the . Wheat prices are now at the highest level in. Corn, soybeans, avocados, almonds, honey, citrus - . And this isn't just in America. According to the United Nations, food prices worldwide were from a year before. "Climate change is a contributor because climate variability, extreme events and sustained droughts in certain regions can reduce yields and hence supplies," said Sanford Eigenbrode, a professor of entomology at the University of Idaho. This isn't to say we're doomed. Some experts believe global food production will adjust to a changing climate. "Climate change will not affect agriculture the same way in all parts of the world," said Ellen Bruno, an agricultural economist at UC Berkeley. "We have a lot of adaptive capacity." In other words, crops that start failing in some parts of the world may thrive in others. Overall, however, climate change is reaching - or has already reached, by some estimates - a point of no return. And this all but guarantees higher food costs in the future. A from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the world's leading authority on climate science, found that droughts that previously occurred perhaps once a decade are now 70% more frequent than in the preindustrial era. Climate change obviously poses a greater threat than just pricier meals. It means hotter temperatures, heavier rainfall, more droughts, rising sea levels, flooding of coastal areas and other dystopian prospects. Solutions for a problem of this scope aren't easy. Nations around the world are being called upon to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and adopt more eco-friendly energy sources. These measures are challenging and expensive, and require both unity and sacrifice - two things that aren't always easy in a world guided mostly by self-interest and short-sightedness. What you can do - what you should do - is support politicians who recognize the danger and who are prepared to rise above selfish interests and show necessary leadership during a time of global crisis. Also consider taking your business to companies that are willing to play a role in addressing climate change, although it's not always clear how serious some corporations are in this regard. Institutional Shareholder Services has found that of Standard & Poor's 500 companies have set ambitious climate change targets. The rest have modest goals or no climate change plans at all. Some tech and retail heavyweights, , have been among the most aggressive in laying out plans to become "carbon neutral" in coming years. But others, especially those in the heavily polluting energy sector, have been cagier about their intentions or have resisted overhauling operations for the sake of planetary survival. As I said up top, this is tough stuff, requiring tough, sweeping solutions - the sort of behavior that human beings historically have not shown themselves to be very good at. So keep the focus tight. If nothing else, think about the food you eat. Think about your daily coffee habit. Hell, think about my daily coffee habit. "People in the U.S. have enjoyed a long period where crop yields have increased and food prices have declined," said Dane Scott, a professor of environmental ethics at the University of Montana. "That period is likely over." He told me price hikes are now "inevitable." "Consumers should expect to pay more for food products to help finance the enormous undertaking of adapting agriculture to a changing climate," Scott said. "The greater the disruption to the Earth's climate system, the greater the social and economic costs of adaptation." And your grande, quad, nonfat, one-pump, no-whip mocha is no exception. The headline news about the global warming provisions of the big budget bill being negotiated in Washington is that they're in trouble. As has been the case with the safety net provisions of the bill, the news coverage has focused on process rather than substance. It has focused on the obstinacy of Sen. Joe Manchin III (D-W.Va.), who seems determined to protect his state's moribund coal industry (from which he collects lots of personal income).Not enough has been written about what's actually in the bill and how it would help the U.S. reach its goals for reducing global warming. So in this follow-up to of the reconciliation package - so dubbed because it's expected to be passed by filibuster-exempt budget reconciliation rules - I'll provide details of the key environmental provisions of the bill. First, some context. The clean-energy provisions of the budget bill, which envisions spending $3.5 trillion over 10 years, are essential for meeting by more than 50% from 2005 levels, with a deadline of 2030. Biden hopes to have a package in hand when he travels to Glasgow, Scotland, for an on Nov. 1 and 2. He's also determined to reverse - on climate initiatives under the Trump administration. The reconciliation package, which congressional Democrats hope to pass in time for Glasgow, may be Biden's best chance to show progress. It won't be his last or only chance, however. Much of what Biden hopes to achieve can be done within the framework of existing laws, which Trump simply ignored or attempted to undermine. Ending that approach will improve America's position in the fight against global warming all by itself. The reconciliation package, however, encompasses new, proactive elements. So let's review the key pieces. Clean electricity. The is one of the two most important provisions in the bill in terms of reducing greenhouse gases. Senate Majority Leader Charles E. Schumer (D-N.Y.) that this provision and electric vehicle rebates together account for two-thirds of the emission reductions in the entire bill. Under the program, utilities that increase their output of clean energy by 4% over the previous year would receive grants of roughly $150 per megawatt-hour of improvement between 2023 and 2030, though the actual calculation is a bit more complicated. (The average residential consumption nationwide comes to about 11 megawatt-hours per year.) Clean energy is defined in the bill in a way that excludes fossil fuels such as oil, gas and coal, leaving chiefly renewable sources such as solar, wind and hydro power. This would be a strong incentive for utilities to step up their conversion to clean generation sources, especially since it would be paired with a penalty of $40 per megawatt-hour by which they miss the 4% goal. Utilities that have reached 85% clean energy would be exempt from the penalty, as long as their percentage of clean generation doesn't fall from the prior year. The utility industry has a ways to go before reaching that mark - in 2020, only including renewables and nuclear. This is evidently the provision that most sticks in Manchin's craw. Not only does he represent the nation's second-largest coal-producing state (after Wyoming), but he collects roughly from a coal brokerage he founded and has left to his son to operate. Manchin probably knows this, but someone ought to remind him that the coal economy is dead. Coal in 2020 accounted for about 19% of U.S. electrical generation and is plummeting; as recently as 2007 it was the nation's largest electrical generating source, with about a 48% share. Manchin has about as much of a chance of saving the coal industry through his stubbornness as the legendary King Canute had of commanding the tide to recede. Coal industry employment reflects reality: It's down to about 42,000 workers, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, down from more than 177,000 in 1985. The Clean Electricity initiative, on the other hand, would produce more than 7 million new jobs over the next 10 years and add more than $900 billion to the economy in that time, according to. Leaks from Capitol Hill over the weekend suggested that Manchin is angling for some variety of giveaways to coal and oil and gas producers in the bill, perhaps by granting incentives to coal plants equipped with carbon capture technology. If that's what it takes to get this crucial measure into law, one supposes that it's a modest price to pay. Electric vehicles. The measure would provide $19 billion in grants and incentives to encourage the rollout of electric vehicles. That would include $3 billion in rebates for equipment such as public chargers, of which $1 billion would be designated for low-income areas. This sort of infrastructure is the missing element in a chicken-and-egg conundrum in the electrification process of the transportation sector. People may be reluctant to buy electric vehicles if they can't be certain of finding places to charge them whenever needed. California alone needs more than 60,000 new charging stations by 2025 as it moves toward its goal of as of 2035, . More than 150,000 stations are needed by 2030 to meet the state's goal of electrifying medium- and heavy-duty vehicles. As it happens, the reconciliation package would include $5 billion in grants and rebates to convert trucks to electricity. The program would cover medium-duty vehicles such as commercial trucks and school buses, and heavy-duty vehicles such as garbage trucks, city buses and big rigs with three axles or more. These programs are indispensable elements in the fight against climate change because the transportation sector, which accounts for 29% of greenhouse gas emissions, is to those emissions in the U.S. Home retrofits. The bill would provide $9 billion through 2031 for home conversions to energy-efficient and electric systems. The sum includes $500 million to train contractors. The eligible work would include energy-efficient home heating, ventilation and air-conditioning, insulation installation and advanced efficiency technologies. Public buildings and electrical infrastructure. The bill includes $3.2 billion for efficiency and electrification upgrades for local public buildings and those housing nonprofits, as well as $17.5 billion for upgrades to federal buildings. An additional $9 billion would be made available for upgrades to the national electric grid to make it suitable for the changes in electricity demand triggered by building upgrades and vehicle electrification. The reconciliation package isn't the only global warming legislation being pondered by congressional Democrats. The Clean Energy for America Act, largely developed by Sen. Ron Wyden (D-Ore.) and passed in May by the Senate Finance Committee, would consolidate and extend tax credits for electric vehicles and eliminate more than a dozen tax breaks long enjoyed by the fossil fuel industry. The urgency of passing many of these programs now isn't just a matter of political bragging rights. The consequences of climate change have never been as vivid as they have become over the last year, given intensively destructive storms, the swamping of low-lying properties thanks to the sea-level rise, temperature extremes across the U.S. and the world, and earlier and longer wildfire seasons on the West Coast. The indications are inescapable that the bill for decades of heedless human activity is coming due. The provisions in the reconciliation bill are merely a preliminary down payment. Inadequate as they are, they're at least a start. Stiffing the climate again would be inexcusable. Joshua trees, the tall, twisty succulents that mark the Mojave Desert, are survivors. Unlike coast redwoods or giant sequoias, they largely escaped harvesting and habitat losses when Europeans colonized their home. They flourished, in fact, until the last decades of the 20th century brought sprawling development and a changing climate. Three weeks ago, a federal court ruled that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service underestimated these threats in a 2019 assessment and must reconsider Joshua trees for protection under the Endangered Species Act. That protection would be a first step toward securing the trees' future, but only a first step. Today, Joshua trees are ensnared in a tangle of interlocking threats. Models of future climates show that 90% or more of the trees' current habitat will be unsuitable by the end of this century. In the hotter, drier parts of the Mojave, seedling Joshua trees are already a rare sight. More mobile animal and plant species have already begun to shift to cooler and wetter portions of their ranges, but not only are Joshua trees rooted in the ground, their seeds are inefficiently dispersed by desert rodents. Given that the trees take decades to grow to reproductive age, and their capacity for movement is at most a few hundred yards a generation, they cannot hope to outpace climate change. There are Joshua tree stands where climates could stay suitable even 80 years from now -- "climate refugia," they're called. Unfortunately, not all refugia are on protected lands, and even a climate refuge inside a national park is not secure against the increasing frequency of wildfire across the Mojave. The cooler conditions that define refugia are also more suitable for certain grasses, which create a carpet of vegetation to fuel fires, and droughts supercharged by climate change ensure that this vegetation carpet is tinder-dry. There are refugia in the higher elevations of Joshua Tree National Park, but up to half of them have burned in recent decades. Another likely refuge was decimated by last year's Cima Dome fire in the Mojave National Preserve, which incinerated as many as a million Joshua trees. Restoring populations after these losses will take decades. Joshua trees are also threatened by expanding urban areas -- the Antelope Valley cities of Lancaster, Palmdale and Victorville have quintupled in population since 1980 -- and by the development that comes with mining and with wind and solar power generation. The Bureau of Land Management is considering a proposal for mining exploration near Conglomerate Mesa, a possible climate refuge with extensive Joshua tree woodlands. The Mojave is also slated for intensive solar energy development to address the wider threat of climate change. The federal government's Desert Renewable Energy and Conservation Plan designated 600 square miles of the Mojave for energy development, and by one estimate, the state of California would need to fill most of that space with solar farms to achieve its planned carbon emission reductions. Many of these farms can be built without compromising pristine Joshua tree habitat, but there is no doubt that the scale of development needed to bring climate change under control will be enormous. Ironically, building the renewable energy capacity we desperately need to avert more severe climate change may be, in some cases, in direct conflict with Joshua trees' capacity to survive climate change. With climate catastrophe now a fact of daily life, we must act urgently to find and protect the Joshua tree populations best equipped to survive. Fighting to save every last Joshua tree will not only be futile; it also risks wasting time, resources, invaluable social capital and political goodwill. Our best hope is to focus on protecting places where Joshua trees still have a fighting chance -- but we do not yet have the data we need to identify those places with confidence. To decide which Joshua trees need focused protections, we must dramatically improve our collection of on-the-ground information about the health of Joshua tree populations across the Mojave: which ones are successfully growing new seedlings and which are faltering. We also need genetic data of a quality that has rarely been gathered in other threatened species, to pinpoint gene variants that allow Joshua trees to weather the harshest conditions. Populations that already harbor those variants may become high priority for protection. We could also replant burned areas in climate refugia with seeds genetically calibrated to survive warmer, drier conditions, or even supplement failing populations with seeds transplanted from their more robust kin. The people who live in and enjoy the wild landscapes of the Mojave must be partners in this effort, from data collection to decision-making. The tribal, state and local governments that oversee much of the private land in the region must be included in the development of any plans to steward its most distinctive tree, and those plans will be far more successful with the input and support of the people who call the desert home. None of this will be easy. It would be far simpler to declare every tree sacred and be done. That approach, however, would fail to harness the resilience that lies within Joshua tree populations -- and it could jeopardize the broader fight against climate change. Joshua trees are a case study in the tangle of trade-offs we must make to protect biodiversity on a warming planet. With care and perspective, they could become a model for how we solve these dilemmas. Amid worsening drought in the West that threatens the region's water and food supplies, Vice President Kamala Harris went to Lake Mead on Monday to pitch the Biden administration's infrastructure and climate change plans, saying they would create jobs and respond to climate change. "It is critical that we as a nation understand that we have within our hands, within our possession, the ability to actually change the course of where we're headed," Harris said, standing in front of a lectern with Lake Mead -- and its precipitously low water levels -- as a backdrop. "Let's get these bills passed." The vice president's visit comes as the West's parched conditions have hit bleak milestones. The Nevada reservoir, which provides water to 25 million people in California, Arizona, Nevada and Mexico, has seen its levels decline every year since 2000 and now is at it lowest level since its creation more than 86 years ago. The reservoir has dropped 140 feet in the last 20 years. Meanwhile, California has registered its driest year in terms of precipitation in a century. Although California has historically gone through cycles of drought, experts say climate change has exacerbated the dryness, as higher temperatures evaporate precipitation and melt snowpack much faster than in the past. President Biden has vowed aggressive action to curb global warming, and set a goal to halve 2005 greenhouse gas emission levels by 2030. But his signature efforts to do so remain in limbo while Congress considers both his bipartisan infrastructure plan and separate spending package to expand social services and combat climate change. The second package will need the approval of all 50 Democratic senators and nearly all Democrats in the House, given their narrow margins in the chamber. But the legislation has been hobbled by disagreements within the party about its size and scope. On climate specifically, key centrist Sens. Joe Manchin III of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona have reportedly signaled concerns about some of the more sweeping provisions, which could put Biden's emissions goal in doubt. At Lake Mead, Harris made a double-barreled appeal for pillars of Biden's legislative agenda. She emphasized how the bipartisan infrastructure bill, which includes water recycling and desalination projects, would create union jobs, and touted the Democrats' spending plan, "Build Back Better," as an effort to slow the warming of the planet. "The Build Back Better agenda will help us tackle the climate crisis with investments in clean energy and electric vehicles, so we can reduce emissions," Harris said. "And why do we need to reduce emissions? Because that is part of what is contributing to these drought conditions." Harris' drought-centric visit dovetailed with new regulations announced by the White House on Monday to curb "forever chemicals," the presence of which in drinking water and consumer goods has been linked to health problems. Under the administration's strategy, the Environmental Protection Agency will require companies that manufacture and use per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances, or PFAS, to publicly report just how much of these compounds are in everyday household items. Though one of the largest sources of contamination has come from the military's use of firefighting foam containing high levels of PFAS, the compounds have been widely used in commercial products such as nonstick pans, waterproof clothing and food packaging. The Defense Department, which oversees dozens of military bases where PFAS has contaminated the soil and groundwater, is still assessing the extent of the damage. In a news release Monday, the administration said the Pentagon expects to have those assessments completed by the end of 2023. The EPA is also moving to designate PFAS as a hazardous substance and is in the process of setting safety limits on two of the most common PFAS chemicals -- there are thought to be more than 4,000 -- in drinking water. Although water and climate were the focus of Harris' Western visit, another pressing concern for her fellow Californians managed to seep in. Before beginning his briefing for the vice president, Daniel Hernandez, director of Clark County Parks and Recreation, greeted her with a teasing "sorry about your Giants," the San Francisco baseball team that recently lost the National League Division Series to rival Los Angeles Dodgers. She responded with a laugh and said, "You know, my husband is very happy." (Second Gentleman Doug Emhoff is a Dodgers fan.) She then said of her team, "We'll live to see another day." As the world staggers through another summer of extreme weather, experts are noticing something different: 2021's onslaught is hitting harder and in places that have been spared global warming's wrath in the past.

Wealthy countries including the United States, Canada, Germany and Belgium are joining poorer and more vulnerable nations on a growing list of places suffering extreme weather events that scientists say have some connection to human-caused climate change.

"It is not only a poor-country problem -- it's now very obviously a rich-country problem," said Debby Guha-Sapir, founder of the international disaster database at the Center for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters at Catholic University of Louvain in Belgium. "[The rich] are getting whacked."

Killer floods hit China, but hundreds also drowned in parts of Germany and Belgium not used to being inundated. Canada and the Pacific Northwest had what climate scientist Zeke Hausfather called "scary" heat that soared past triple digits, shattering records and accompanied by unusual wildfires. Now, southern Europe is seeing unprecedented heat and fire.

And peak Atlantic hurricane and U.S. wildfire seasons are only just starting.

When what would become Hurricane Elsa formed July 1, it broke last year's record for the earliest fifth-named Atlantic storm. Colorado State University has already increased its forecast for the number of named Atlantic storms. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration will update its season outlook on Wednesday.

For fire season, the U.S. West is the driest it has been since 1580, based on soil-moisture readings and tree-ring records, setting the stage for worsening fires if something ignites them, said UCLA climate and fire scientist Park Williams.

What happens with U.S. hurricane and fire seasons drives the end-of-year statistics for total damage costs of weather disasters, said Ernst Rauch, chief climate and geoscientist for insurance giant Munich Re. So far this year, he said, wealthier regions have seen the biggest economic losses.

When poorer countries are hit, they are less prepared and their people can't use air conditioning or leave, so there's more harm to human life, said Hausfather, climate director of the Breakthrough Institute. Although hundreds of people died in the Pacific Northwest heat wave, he said the number would have been much higher in poor areas.

Madagascar, an island nation off East Africa, is in the middle of consecutive droughts that the United Nations warns are pushing 400,000 people toward starvation.

Although it's too early to say that the summer of 2021 will break records for climate disasters, "we're certainly starting to see climate change push extreme events into new territories where they haven't been seen before," Hausfather said.

The number of weather, water and climate disasters so far this year is only slightly higher than the average of recent years, said disaster researcher Guha-Sapir. Her group's database, which she said is still missing many events, shows 208 such disasters worldwide through July -- about 11% more than the last decade's average, but a bit less than last year.

Last year, the record-shattering heat was in Siberia, where few people live, but this year it struck Portland, Ore., and British Columbia, which is getting more Western media attention, Hausfather said.

What's happening is "partly an increase in the statistics of these extreme events, but also just that the steady drumbeat, the pile on year-on-year ... takes its cumulative toll on all of us who are reading these headlines," said Georgia Tech climate scientist Kim Cobb.

"This pattern of recent Northern Hemisphere summers has been really quite stark," said climate scientist Peter Stott of the University of Exeter.

Although overall temperature rise is "playing out exactly as we said 20 years ago, ... what we are seeing in terms of the heat waves and the floods is more extreme than we predicted back then," Stott said.

Climate scientists say there is little doubt climate change from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas is driving extreme events.

Aside from floods and fires, heat waves are a major risk to prepare for in the future, Guha-Sapir said.

"It's going to be a very big deal in the Western countries because the most susceptible to sudden peaks of heat are older people. And the demographic profile of the people in Europe is very old," she said.

Reading the news over the last month - or maybe just stepping outside - you could get the sense that something has gone wrong with the weather. One heat wave after another has struck the West Coast, which, as a result, is now on fire. Western Europe has been deluged by rain, killing hundreds. Across Asia, from Japan to Turkey, temperature records have been falling like dominoes, and, most recently, several cities in China have been flooded by heavy rainfall.

The question on everyone's mind is whether this confluence of catastrophes is being caused by climate change. On one level the answer is a clear yes: Climate change puts more heat into the atmosphere, which directly causes high temperatures and indirectly increases the intensity of rainstorms by allowing air to hold more water vapor. But the approximately two-degree Fahrenheit increase in global average surface temperature caused by climate change so far represents only a relatively minor part of any single event. If Portland had reached 114 degrees at the end of June rather than 116, it would still have been the hottest day in the city's history. If Western Germany had received 7% less rain (that is, if we subtract out the additional moisture the atmosphere can currently hold thanks to climate change), it would still have experienced more than a month's worth of rainfall in a single day.

In fact, the true driving force behind all this extreme weather is the same: The behavior of the jet stream. The jet stream is the large band of strong wind that makes your flight from the U.S. to London shorter (and the return trip longer), and it plays a crucial role in determining the weather of the Northern Hemisphere. For one, it serves as something of a dividing line between two major air masses: the hot, wet air of the tropics and the cold, dry air of the Arctic.

When the jet stream bends toward Texas, temperatures in the U.S. fall as cold air is allowed to rush south. The reverse occurs when it bends north. But just as importantly, the jet stream also pulls the weather with it as it rushes along -- if it's raining in Boston on Tuesday, then by Wednesday the clouds will typically have been blown away and replaced with a new system.

All of this, though, assumes that the jet stream is moving along an approximately straight course, like an interstate slicing across the country from west to east. If, instead, its path develops large waves, like a meandering back road, this causes problems for those of us living underneath it. For one, it causes unseasonable weather to fill in the pockets, allowing tropical air to rush up into the northern parts of the country and producing the sorts of heat domes that have been responsible for record-breaking temperatures. But it also causes the jet stream to slow down, not unlike traffic on the winding road. This means that one hot, or cold, or rainy, day stretches into a week, prolonging the suffering and vastly increasing the risks to human life. Over the last month, the jet stream has resembled a switchback trail, causing weather pileups around the globe.

The scary question we should be asking is not if human activity is making heat waves hotter and rainstorms rainier -- it is. The question is whether our activity is also making these weather events more frequent and longer-lasting by kinking up the jet stream. This is an active area of research as the links between a wavy jet stream and climate change are not altogether clear. Some scientists believe that the warming climate won't have much of an effect on the jet stream, while others think that the planet's rising temperatures will lead to a slower, more meandering jet stream.

This latter possibility is what should really be keeping us up at night (well, that and the oppressive heat). If further studies show that the jet stream is becoming wavier, then we can all anticipate a lot more summers where the weather stops making sense.

Faced with polls showing not only that most Americans want more done about climate change, but that a majority of Republicans feel the same way, a substantial number of GOP lawmakers are sounding a conciliatory note on the issue.

Sixty House Republicans have now joined a Conservative Climate Caucus, formed by Rep. John Curtis (R-Utah), that is willing at least to acknowledge the problem instead of labeling it a hoax, as President Trump did early on, or pretending that it's temporary and that human actions haven't contributed. Among its members are three Californians: Reps. David Valadao of Hanford, Michelle Steel of Seal Beach and Jay Obernolte of Big Bear Lake.

Republicans in both chambers appear ready to start talking -- and go a little bit further. The Senate recently voted 92 to 8 for the Growing Climate Solutions Act, which was supported by the Citizens' Climate Lobby. If it passes the House as expected and is signed into law by President Biden, it would ease the way for farmers and ranchers to earn and sell credits for reducing or mitigating greenhouse gas emissions.

That's progress, as is the less divisive approach. But in truth, the climate caucus and its somewhat more solutions-oriented tone are far too little, coming this late in the game.

Curtis talks about how he has spent a lot of time trying to understand the science, He and other Republicans needed to be quicker studies because the world is running out of time to avert the worst effects of climate change.

Worse, the caucus' public statements indicate that its members won't support reining in the use of fossil fuels in serious ways, as climate scientists insist we must do. Instead, the caucus calls those sources of greenhouse gases part of the solution to the need for stable sources of energy.

The caucus' other areas of interest -- safe nuclear energy and carbon sequestration -- are more promising, with caveats. If Republicans can somehow come up with a truly safe nuclear path, the nation will be all ears.

Right now, however, "safe nuclear" rings a little bit like the oxymoron "clean coal." And before any thought of expanding nuclear energy can occur, the country would first have to identify a place to store spent fuel rods and then figure out a foolproof way to transport them there.

The most stable forms of energy are the nearly infinite ones, such as solar and wind, not fuels that will eventually be tapped out (and that cause other environmental harms in their extraction). Nor does this country need to rely on foreign sources to maintain a steady supply of the sun.

It will be important for Republicans not to use this as a shield to convince America that they really do care about climate change and the increasingly frequent droughts, wildfires and extreme weather events, when in fact they aren't willing to take tough steps to soften future blows. Any discussion of environmental reform that excludes a drastic reduction in the use of fossil fuels is just happy talk, not reality.

Nor is it helpful to complain, as Curtis does, that nothing we do will matter much as long as China emits more carbon than the United States. On a per capita basis, this country still produces more greenhouse gas emissions, and China has been making major strides toward clean energy.

For now, incremental change is better than none at all. The reality is that support from both parties will be needed to pass important new climate change laws, and so the help of Republicans is welcome in accomplishing that -- as long as they don't demand concessions on the move to clean, sustainable energy in exchange for supporting tree-planting. With the mounting evidence all around us, the GOP should not have to be dragged kicking and screaming into admitting that there is a climate crisis and that it will require serious and sometimes uncomfortable commitments from the nation.

Potentially record-breaking temperatures are on their way to wide swaths of Southern California -- a scorcher scientists say is clearly tied to climate change and could be lethal for those unprepared.

"Heat waves are killers," said retired oceanographer and climatologist William Patzert, noting that more and more people in the Southwest and elsewhere are exposed to dangerous temperatures, even inside their homes.

A heat warning is in effect for the Santa Clarita Valley, Antelope Valley and parts of the Los Angeles County mountains, set to expire over Sunday and Monday.

The National Weather Service expects "dangerously hot conditions," with temperatures up to 113 degrees in the Antelope Valley -- potentially record-breaking heat for this time of year, according to meteorologist David Sweet.

If the Antelope Valley reaches 113 degrees this weekend, it will be far from the first heat record broken in Southern California this summer.

"All three of our desert climate sites (Palm Springs, Thermal and Anza- Borrego) experienced their hottest June on record, with mean monthly temperatures of 93.5 F, 91.0 F, and 91.7 F respectively," the National Weather Service's office in San Diego tweeted Tuesday.

Temperatures of 120 to 128 are expected over the weekend in Death Valley, with daily record high temperatures "likely to be rivaled or broken," according to the weather service.

With highs expected near 112 degrees, "we could be looking at some daily records in Fresno, especially on Sunday and Monday," said meteorologist Colin McKellar at the National Weather Service's Hanford office. In addition, Bakersfield, Merced and other areas of the Central Valley may break daily heat records over the weekend into Monday, McKellar said.

The Indian Wells Valley may experience its hottest day on record, McKellar said, with a high near 118 degrees possible on Saturday.

The Palm Springs area is also expecting a potentially record-breaking heat wave this weekend, with temperatures up to 121 expected across the Coachella Valley, according to the National Weather Service. This weekend, "it's going to be pretty close, probably within a few degrees of some daily records," said meteorologist Bruno Rodriguez with the National Weather Service's San Diego office.

The hot weekend comes after a "mega heat dome" struck the Pacific Northwest and western Canada earlier this month, killing hundreds, igniting fires and prompting a study that quickly tied it to climate change.

This incoming heat wave can also be attributed to a warming planet, said Patzert.

"Over the past 60 years, every decade has been hotter than the previous decade. None of this should be a surprise," he said. "We've had what I would call a tipping point or a crisis here with regard to heat waves."

Heat poses a serious risk to human health, Patzert explained, especially when it surpasses 95 degrees. "That's when the human body starts to have negative reactions," he said. With climate change, "we're spending more and more time over that [95 degree] threshold at various locations, especially in the West."

The extreme temperatures will be particularly dangerous "for those working or participating in outdoor activities," the heat alert for the Antelope Valley explains. The National Weather Service predicts overnight temperatures will remain "very warm" in the area, hovering in the mid-70s to mid-80s.

Residents in high heat areas should drink fluids, avoid spending time in the sun and check on family members and neighbors periodically. Adults and pets should not be left in vehicles, the National Weather Service warns.

Free, air-conditioned cooling centers are available across L.A. County, with a list of locations at ready.lacounty.gov/heat. Additional tips for extreme heat can be found at publichealth.lacounty.gov.

Heat-related illness can be serious and life-threatening. Anyone suffering from signs of heat stroke should call 911.

With the heat and dry conditions also come an elevated fire risk, Sweet said. The National Weather Service urges residents to use caution with any potential flame sources, as fires continue to blaze across the state.

Climate change, heat waves and unhealthy forests are combining to compound the threat of blazes, Patzert said. "The great forests, the Sierra and the Rockies becoming more and more desiccated and more prone to these extreme fire situations."

In addition to the Antelope Valley, heat warnings are in effect for many other areas in California, such as the Cuyama Valley, parts of San Luis Obispo County, and large swaths of San Bernardino and Riverside counties.

Heat waves shine a glaring light on both local and global inequities, experts say.

In low-income neighborhoods, with fewer trees and less access to air conditioning, "the heat wave is more punishing," Patzert said. "As CO2 levels in the atmosphere continue to rise, the misery level across the planet will certainly follow."

"If we don't do some serious environmental mediation, which means weaning ourselves off fossil fuel, and considerable adaptation, which means making air conditioning more available for more people, the heat waves of 2021 will seem mild in 2031," Patzert said. "We'll be referring to 2021 as the good old days."

Ash is raining from the sky, and smoke, thick enough to taste, covers Lakeview, Ore., where I live just five miles from the Bootleg fire evacuation zone. The fire has already consumed more than 620 square miles and continues on its path of destruction, moving closer to my home by the minute. We're used to wildfires in eastern Oregon, but things have never been this bad. In June, a deadly heat wave shattered records and killed 116 people in Oregon alone. Now, the Bootleg fire is the largest of dozens of wildfires raging throughout the Western U.S. -- and it's only July.

The science is irrefutable: These extreme events would not be happening were it not for the reality of human-caused climate change. Reducing greenhouse gas emissions alone will fail to meet the moment: Managing overcrowded forests and fixing outdated energy infrastructure must be central features in new climate policies.

The Bootleg fire has already hit major transmission lines, disrupting electricity flow and threatening the infrastructure that provides power to nearly 80% of California.

The health of the landscape in Lake County, where Lakeview is the county seat, depends on frequent, low-severity fires that have historically cleaned out dead trees and prevented larger, more destructive fires. But nearly 100 years of excessive fire suppression have disrupted this cycle. To get back on track we need active forest management activities that promote ecological diversity, support healthy trees and reduce the risk of catastrophic wildfire.

These methods commonly include thinning areas with too many trees followed by prescribed burning to maintain tree health and promote the growth of grasses, shrubs and flowers that are all contributors to a forest's ability to capture carbon from the atmosphere and store it in the soil. But these forest management activities are held up by a substantial lack of federal funding.

Meanwhile, planned safety power shut-offs intended to reduce the danger associated with extreme weather and transmission lines can leave entire communities without power. It's clear that our current approach to forest management and a centralized energy system are contributing factors to the crisis. Investing in active forest management while shifting to clean and distributed energy systems on a community scale ensures that when the next "megafire" ignites, the risk of large-scale power outage is all but eliminated.

Even as fires ravage Oregon, our state is making progress. A state House bill passed last month committed Oregon to 100% clean electricity by 2040 and approved $50 million in grants for community-scale renewable energy projects. This legislation puts Oregon on track to make the quickest shift to a renewable-powered electric grid in the nation, and it recognizes the need for self-contained energy generation that can stay online during extreme weather events. Along with an increased pace and scale of forest management, these are the kinds of solutions needed across the U.S.

As the Bootleg fire pushes closer to where I live, I will continue to prepare for the fire to overtake my land and my home. I trust the firefighters tasked with protecting my belongings, but if the megafires that have burned over the last few years have demonstrated anything, it's that no matter how prepared you are, nothing is guaranteed. The Bootleg fire is the latest real-time demonstration of how climate change affects us all.

If state and federal governments do not do more to quickly improve forest management practices; transition to clean, localized electricity; and reduce greenhouse gas emissions, many more people will end up where so many Oregonians currently are: evacuating their neighborhoods and hoping their homes don't burn. 